# Dynamic Web Pages with JavaScript

## What Do We Know

- Uses the Console  
- Debugging  
- First Object Oriented Programming Language  
- Turns web sites into applications > user interaction  
- Boolean expressions  
- Conditional statements  
- Loops  
- JavaScript and Java programming language are not the same thing, even though both are trademarks of Oracle, they have very different syntax, semantics and use
- It's a good programming practice to declare all variables at the beginning of a script

## What is JavaScript 

JavaScript is a lightweight, interpreted, or just-in-time compiled language with first-class functions. It is known as the "scripting language for webpages". Lots of non-browser environments also use it such as node.js, Apache CouchDB and Adobe Acrobat. JS is a protype-based, multi-paradigm, single threaded, dynamic language, supporting object-oriented, imperative, and declaritive programming styles. The standards for JS are ECMA-262 (ECMAScript Language Specification) and ECMA-402 (ECMAScript Internationalization API Specification)

Dynamic capabilites include:

* runtime object construction
* variable parameter lists
* function variables
* dynamic script creation
* object introspection
* source code recovery

## Getting Started

Traditionally, JS was used inside web browsers and the auther would include some JS code in the HTML page. It would run "client side" as opposed to server-side. Recently though, people have started to put JS code on the server as well. The most well known environment to run JS on the server is Node.js. We can distingush 3 major parts of what we refer to as JavaScript:

1. The language itself - among client-side and server-side environments.
2. The DOM API - how the language can interact with the various parts of a webpage while in the browser. Several libraries (like JQuery) are trying to provide a unified API.
3. The server API (or just API) - provided by Node.js or other server-side systems

* Start with any text editor
* Embed the JS code inside the HTML file, or include a line in the HTML file that includes the external JS file. The latter is recommended but we will start with inside the HTML file. 

We add the **script** opening and </ closing tags and between them we write our JS code. 

## Input Output

Let's interact with the JS code running in the browser. There are a number of way JS can display text for the user (output). The most simple one is by using the alert function. This will show a pop-up window in the browser with the text. 

* We can use the **document.write** function to change what is shown
* Use function **console.log** to print out debugging info. 

Most browsers provide a "JS console", an additional window that is normally not visbile, where the browser can print out warnings and errors generated by the execution of JS code. The developer can also print information to this console using the console.log() call. 

## JavaScript Input with Prompt and Confirm

Now that we now how to output from JavaScript, let's look at two ways we can receive input.  

prompt - it will show a pop-up window with the text provided as the first parameter with a textbox the user can fill in. When the user presses OK, the value in the textbox will be retunred b the prompt() function. 

confirm - this pop-up is not reallty an input method. It allows the developer to ask a yes/no question. Calling the confirm() function will show a pop-up window with the provided texts with two buttons. If the user presses OK the confirm() function will return true, if the usser presses cancel or the escape key, the function will return false. 

## JS Variables

Variables are containers for storing data (data values). You can declare a JS variable is four ways:

* Using var (backwards compatible before 2015)
* Using let (if you think the value will change)
* Using const (use this for a general rule)
* Using nothing  

This creates the variable (undefined), and you use different declarations depending on the value you want to assign it. You can assign a value using an assignment operator. Note that we cannot re-declare let and const variables, just var.  

## **Assignment Operator**  

In JS, the equal sign = is an assignment operator, not an equal to operator.

x = x + 5

This assigns the value to x + 5 to x  

The equal to operator is written like == in JS  

All variables must be identified with unique names, called identifiers like such:  

* Names can contain letters, digits, underscores, and dollar signs.

* Names must begin with a letter.

* Names can also begin with $ and _

* Names are case sensitive (y and Y are different variables).

* Reserved words (like JavaScript keywords) cannot be used as names.





## How Computers Work

* Software controls hardware

* Manipulate information - input, storage, processing, output

* Everything is 0s and 1s, an algorithm is just a series of commands

* 



## Reference Links

[JavaScript Intro](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript)    
[Basic Output](https://code-maven.com/introduction-to-javascript)  
[Input with Prompt and Confirm](https://code-maven.com/javascript-input-with-prompt-and-confirm)  
[JS Variables](https://www.w3schools.com/js/js_variables.asp)  
[JavaScript Guide](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide)  
[JavaScript Reference](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference)  
[JavaScript Technologies Overview](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/JavaScript_technologies_overview)  
[Front-end Web Developer Course](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/Front-end_web_developer)  
[code.org](ocde.org)  

## Answer These Questions

What are variables in JavaScript?

* they are containers to store data values

What does it mean to declare a variable?

* It means to create a varibale, using the correct type (var, let or const)  

What is an “assignment” operator, and what does it do?

* It is represented by a single equal sign, and it assigns a value to the variable  

What is information received from the user called?

* text input data, by using the prompt() function  
